Common Delusions of Pro-Birthers
May 4, 2022
I’ve noticed most anti-choice / forced-birthers / pro-’life’rs have a few key arguments and beliefs:
Life starts at conception. Okay sure, so you believe a zygote is a full, living person. The natural conclusion of this is that a pregnant person’s body is no longer their own. I like to respond by saying that I believe life starts at ejaculation (since it’s usually men who say this), and that masturbation should be made illegal and punishable by castration (legally blond reference). Same for all people who menstruate and are absolutely wasting their precious eggs. So many lives lost! Oh the humanity!
My child (or I) wouldn’t have been born! My response, and this may sound harsh, but: this actually isn’t about you. This isn’t about alternative scenarios, it’s about punishment. It’s about having more unsafe abortions and more stigma/shame on women for their choices. It’s about control, and combining church and state. And all that said, what about all the women who wouldn’t have died or had a more fulfilling life without children? What about regretful parents?
God knows better than doctors/science. A doctor may have decades of experience and say there is a 99.9% chance this baby will be stillborn and/or the mother will die, and a pro-birther will respond: ‘God lies in that 0.1%’ or whatever. However, 99.9% means that out of 1000 people in a similar scenario, 1 will not have a stillborn and/or die. If you believe you are the 1 out of 1000 people then I wish you luck on your lottery tickets you own. I’m honestly glad you have spirituality in your life, but choice is about risks and tradeoffs, and believing in God doesn’t make crossing the street with a blindfold less risky. Please don’t gamble with people’s lives - this is what forcing your religion on someone looks like in practice.
Pure virtue signaling. Finally! Fetuses! A group that I can defend to show that I’m a good person! They’re perfect: they don’t fight back, they don’t make demands, as soon as a baby is born I can say ‘you’re welcome’ and then give them a pat on the head and walk away. Unlike those pesky minorities or orphans who need food and keep saying I’m ‘not helping’ or call me ‘racist’ or ‘sexist.’ For a fetus, just by taking their first breath I can forever be an important savior of humanity. Okay, now I’m back to my moral licensing. “‘The unborn’ are a convenient group of people to advocate for.” - Methodist Pastor David Barnhart
Pure hypocrisy. The Only Moral Abortion is My Abortion. Enough Said.
It’s not a ban, this is about state’s rights! Yeah, just like the civil war was about state’s rights, yeah? If slaves didn’t like it they could just run away to the North right? Easy peasy lemon squeezy. Poor people can just travel to luxury villas in Europe to get their abortions obviously! I’m teaching you about the law as part of my duty as a citizen! See how smart I am? Everyone is too upset that abortion is gone, but it’s not 100% gone, it’s just moved to a debate by states! And there’s always two sides to a debate! Two sides! For example, all human rights - should we have them or not? There’s always two sides! Two sides!
I’m not pro-life OR pro-choice. Sure, change the meaning of words. Cool. You are above it all. I look forward to you voting to support early education and daycare and allowing access to birth control for your ‘pro-life’ stance. Often this is just someone mixing up making an informed decision and actually having agency to make a choice at all.
This is an emotionally difficult issue and involves big feelings. People often have trauma around abortions and their experiences (see Exhale a nonprofit for after abortion counseling services).
If you see yourself making these arguments please seek help / therapy and leave other people’s wombs alone please. Honestly you might have some grief and trauma you need to process and I truly mean that.
If you have seen these arguments, remember to keep boundaries for yourself and not feed the trolls/take the bait. As we’ve seen with the pandemic, many people are willing to die before changing their beliefs. Side note: I’m linking an article I wrote on Understanding and Combating Conspiracy Theories in case it’s helpful for anyone’s sanity/family relationships.
